>> Ifill: CROWDS JAMMED TAHRIR
SQUARE AND FIREWORKS ERUPTED
OVER THE CITY TONIGHT, AS THE
EGYPTIAN MILITARY OUSTED
PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
GET THE LATEST ON THE DRAMATIC
DEVELOPMENTS, INCLUDING THE
APPOINTMENT OF AN INTERIM LEADER
AND SUSPENSION OF THE COUNTRY'S
CONSTITUTION.
>> Ifill: THEN, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION GIVES EMPLOYERS A
ONE-YEAR RRIEVEPE ON THE MANDATE
TO PROVIDE HEALTH INSURANCE.
WE ASK WHAT THE DELAY MEANS FOR
BUSINESSES AND WORKERS.
>> Brown: RAY SUAREZ EXAMINES
THE DIPLOMATIC SAGA UNFOLDING AS
THE WORLD WONDERS WHERE EDWARD
SNOWDEN IS AND WHAT HIS FATE
WILL BE.
>> Ifill: FRED DE SAM LAZARO
REPORTS ON ONE GROUP'S EFFORTS
TO HELP VICTIMS OF THE DEADLY
FACTORY COLLAPSE IN BANGLADESH.
>> EVERY BUSINESS THAT WE HAVE
GONE INTHAS O SOMETHING TO DO
WITH POOR PEOPLES' NEEDS.
WE ARE LOOKING AT OPPORTUNITIES
WE NEED TO DO SOMETHING VERY
QUICKLY, OTHERWISE BANGLADESH
MIGHT LOSE A LOT OF BUSINESS.
>> Brown: AND JUDY WOODRUFF GETS
AN INSIDE-THE-COURTROOM ACCOUNT
OF THE TRIAL OF WHITEY BULGER,
THE ACCUSED BOSTON MOB BOSS
CHARGED WITH RACKETEERING AND
MURDER.
>>
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: EGYPT'S FIRST
DEMOCRATICALLY ELECTED LEADER
HAS BEEN OVERTHROWN BY THE
COUNTRY'S ARMED FORCES.
PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI HAS
REPORTEDLY BEEN MOVED TO AN
UNDISCLOSED LOCATION.
MORSI'S TWITTER ACCOUNT QUOTES
HIM SAYING HE REJECTS WHAT HE
CALLED A "FULL COUP."
MARGARET WARNER BEGINS OUR
COVERAGE.
>> Reporter: CHEERS ERUPTED FROM
HUNDREDS  OF THOUSANDS
CELEBRATING IN TAHRIR SQUARE, AS
THE COMMANDER OF EGYPT'S ARMY
ANNOUNCED PRESIDENT MOHAMED
MORSI WAS NO LONGER IN POWER.
>> THE CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL COURT WILL
DECLARE BEFORE THE COURT THE
EARLY PRESIDENT ELECTION, WHERE
THE JUSTICE OF THE
CONSTITUTIONAL COURT WILL RUN
THE STATE'S AFFAIRS UNIT IN THE
INTERIM PERIOD, UNTIL THE NEW
PRESIDENT IS ELECTED.
>> Reporter: HE ALSO SAID THE
STATE'S ISLAMIC-BACKED
CONSTITUTION WOULD BE SUSPENDED
PENDING REVIEW.
IT ALL HAPPENED AFTER A TENSION
FILLED 24-HOURS, AS A MILITARY-
IMPOSED DEADLINE NEARED FOR
PRESIDENT MORSI TO RESPOND TO
THE DEMANDS OF THE PEOPLE IN THE
STREETS.
IN A DEFIANT SPEECH TO THE
NATION  LAST NIGHT,  MORSI
VEHEMENTLY DEFENDED HIS POSITION
AS THE ELECTED LEADER OF THE
COUNTRY.
>> WE NOW HAVE A REFERENCE, WE
NOW HAVE LEGITIMACY WITH OUR OWN
WILL; AN ELECTED PRESIDENT, A
CONSTITUTION VOTED BY THE PEOPLE
AND WE ARE WORKING ACCORDING TO
THIS LEGITIMACY.
THIS LEGITIMACY IS THE ONLY
THING THAT WILL GUARANTEE US
ALL, IF WE RESPECT IT, THAT
THERE WILL NOT BE HOSTILITIES
BETWEEN US.
HOW WILL THE REVOLUTION NOT BE
STOLEN FROM US?
>> Reporter: WHEN MORNING CAME,
EGYPTIANS AWOKE TO REPORTS THAT
THE MILITARY HAD TAKEN OVER THE
"AL AHRAM" NEWSPAPER.
AND ARMORED VEHICLES SURROUNDED
THE STATE TELEVISION
HEADQUARTERS, AS OFFICERS WERE
STATIONED IN CORRIDORS AND THE
MAIN NEWSROOM.
MINUTES BEFORE THE MILITARY
DEADLINE PASSED, MORSI'S OFFICE
DID RELEASE A STATEMENT BACKING
A COALITION GOVERNMENT AS A
MEANS TO RESOLVE THE CONFLICT.
BUT THE LAST DITCH EFFORT WAS
LARGELY IGNORED BY OPPOSITION
POLITICAL, RELIGIOUS, AND YOUTH
LEADERS, WHO MET INSTEAD WITH
THE MILITARY CHIEFS TO PLAN A
WAY FORWARD.
AND SECURITY OFFICIALS
REPORTEDLY IMPOSED TRAVEL BANS
ON MORSI AND HIS TOP ALLIES.
LIBERAL OPPOSITION LEADER
MOHAMED ELBARADEI SAID THAT THE
ARAB SPRING-INSPIRED REVOLUTION
OF 2011 HAD BEEN RELAUNCHED BY
TODAY'S ANNOUNCEMENT OF AN ARMY-
SPONSORED ROADMAP.
IN HIS ANNOUNCEMENT TONIGHT THE
COMMANDER OF EGYPT'S ARMY SAID
IT'S TIME TO BRING THE COUNTRY
TOGETHER.
>> (translated): THE EGYPTIAN
ARMORED FORCES  APPEAL TO THE
EGYPTIAN PEOPLE WITH ALL ITS
SPECTRUM TO MAINTAIN PEACEFUL
DEMONSTRATION, STEER AWAY FROM
VIOLENCE, WHICH WILL BRING ABOUT
FURTHER TENSION AND SHEDDING THE
BLOOD OF THE INNOCENT.
AND THE ARMED FORCES WARNED THAT
IT WILL STAND UP FIRMLY IN
CORPORATION WITH THE INTERIOR
MINISTRY SECURITY PERSONNEL
FIRMLY AND STRICTLY TO ANY ACT
DEVIATING FROM PEACEFULNESS
UNDER THE RULE OF LAW, BASED ON
ITS PATRIOTIC AND HISTORIC
>> Reporter: LARGE CROWDS REMAIN
ON THE STREETS OF CAIRO, AS
EGYPTIAN TROOPS HAVE BEEN
DEPLOYED AROUND THE CITY IN CASE
OF VIOLENCE.
>> Brown: THIS EVENING: THE
STATE DEPARTMENT STARTED
ORDERING NON-ESSENTIAL DIPLOMATS
AND THEIR FAMILIES TO LEAVE
EGYPT.
JOINING US AGAIN FROM CAIRO
TONIGHT IS NANCY YOUSSEF OF
"McCLATCHY" NEWSPAPERS.
AND HERE WITH ME: MICHELLE
DUNNE, DIRECTOR OF THE ATLANTIC
COUNCIL CENTER FOR THE MIDDLE
EAST.
AND SAMER SHEHATA, ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR OF INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
OKLAHOMA.
WELL, NANCY USE RECEIVE YOUSSEF,
LET ME START WITH YOU.
WHAT WAS THE MOOD IN THE STREETS
AFTER THIS ANNOUNCEMENT?
>> WELL, FOR THE MOST PART IT
WAS QUITE EUPHORIC AND YOU CAN
HEAR IT BEHIND ME RIGHT NOW.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS IF NOT
MILLIONS NATIONWIDE HAVE TAKEN
TO THE STREETS TO CELEBRATE THIS
INTERVENTION BY THE MILITARY
WHICH IS THE LAST REMAINING
NATIONALIST INSTITUTION HERE.
BUT IN THE SMALLER POCKETS WHERE
MORSI SUPPORTERS GATHERED THEY
RAINED GUN FIRE DOWN IN ANGER.
THEY TALKED ABOUT JIHAD.
THEY TALKED ABOUT BEING PREPARED
TO DIE FOR THIS, THAT THIS IS
ABOUT DEFENDING THEIR FAITH AS
MUCH AS IT WAS ABOUT DEFENDING
MORSI.
BUT OVERWHELMINGLY THERE'S
JOYFUL CELEBRATIONS HAPPENING AS
WE SPEAK RIGHT NOW.
>> Brown: NANCY, IS THERE
ANYTHING MORE KNOWN ABOUT THE
WHEREABOUTS OF MORSI HIMSELF?
>> NO, WE HAVEN'T HEARD
ANYTHING.
WE SAW A COUPLE STATEMENTS
ALLEGEDLY BY HIM ON FACEBOOK
CALLING THIS A MILITARY COUP,
HIS AIDES SAY HE'S BEEN MOVED TO
AN UNDISCLOSED LOCATION BUT WE
DON'T KNOW WHERE THAT IS.
WE DON'T KNOW WHETHER HE'LL BE
ARRESTED.
THERE ARE RUMORS OF THAT RIGHT
NOW, ONE OF MANY RUMORS
SPREADING THROUGH EGYPT RIGHT
NOW.
THE OTHER THING WE DON'T KNOW
ABOUT IS WHERE THE SENIOR AIDES
OF THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD ARE
AND WHAT THEIR STATE.
IS THERE WAS A REPORT EARLIER
TODAY THAT THEY HAD BEEN
FORBIDDEN FROM TRAVELING OUT OF
EGYPT.
WE'LL SEE WHAT HAPPENS TOMORROW
IF THERE'S ANY ARREST OR ACTION
BY THE MILITARY OR BY THE POLICE
FORCES ON THE BROTHERHOOD.
>> Brown: SAMER SHEHATA, A COUP
BUT ONE WITH POPULAR SUPPORT.
WHAT ARE WE SEEING SNOWED
>> I THINK CLEARLY THE "COUP"
HAS TO BE MODIFIED.
THERE WAS A DEBATE AMONG
ANALYSTS WHETHER WHAT HAPPENED
IN 2011 AGAINST MUBARAK WAS A
REVOLUTION OR WHETHER IT WAS AN
UPRISING BECAUSE THE MILITARY
GOT RID OF MUBARAK BUT WERE
STILL IN POWER.
I THINK THERE IS A LEGITIMATE
DEBATE ABOUT WHETHER THIS WAS
COUP, CERTAINLY NOT IN THE
CLASSIC SENSE OF A FEW MILITARY
OFFICERS TAKING OUT ANOTHER
LEADER.
THERE WERE MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
OUT ON THE STREETS SINCE JUNE 30
AND I THINK THAT'S REALLY THE
KEY POINT HERE.
THAT IS THAT AN UNPRECEDENTED --
IN UNPRECEDENTED NUMBERS THEY
WENT OUT AND WITHDREW THEIR
SUPPORT AND WITHDREW THE
LEGITIMACY OF MOHAMED MORSI.
THIS ISN'T AN IDEAL SITUATION,
BUT NEVERTHELESS IT'S NOT SIMPLY
A COUP.
>> Brown: MICHELLE DUNNE, SHOULD
WE SEE IT AS PREDOMINANTLY A
SENTIMENT AGAINST MORS ANY
PRO-MILITARY?
HOW DIVIDED A COUNTRY THIS AT
THE MOMENT?
>> THERE IS THIS POLARIZATION
BETWEEN ISLAMISTS AND
NON-ISLAMISTS AND THERE ARE ALSO
ELEMENTS OF THE OLD STATE THAT
HAVE BEEN ACTIVE HERE.
NOT ONLY THE MILITARY BUT THE
POLICE AND THE STATE MEDIA AND
SO FORTH.
I THINK WHAT WE SAW HAPPEN WAS
THAT A LOT OF THE ELEMENTS OF
THE OLD SYSTEM WERE WILLING TO
WORK WITH THE BROTHERHOOD AND
GIVE MORSI A CHANCE BUT THEY
FELT THAT HE FAILED.
HE FAILED TO GOVERN THE COUNTRY.
HE FAILED TO STABILIZE THE
SITUATION, TO START MOVING THE
ECONOMY IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION
AND SO THEY STARTED WITHDRAWING
THEIR SUPPORT FROM HIM.
THE PARTS OF THE STATE, THAT IS.
AND THAT ALIGNED THEMSELVES WITH
THE SECULAR OPPOSITION AND
FINALLY THE MILITARY WAS THE
FINAL PIECE.
>> Brown: SAMER SHEHATA, WHAT'S
YOUR SENSE OF THE MILITARY RIGHT
NOW?
HOW DOES IT SEE ITSELF?
WHAT'S IT ROLE?
WHAT WILL BE ITS NEXT STEP?
>> THIS IS ANOTHER AMAZING PART
OF THIS STORY, RIGHT?
A YEAR AGO THERE WAS WIDESPREAD
DISSATISFACTION WITH THE
MILITARY.
REMEMBER THE SUPREME COUNCIL OF
THE ARMED FORCES WERE IN CHARGE
OF THE COUNTRY FROM THE TIME
MUBARAK WAS OUSTED UNTIL
MR. MORSI WAS ELECTED AND THEY
DID AN ABYSMAL JOB AND THEY
KILLED PROTESTERS AND THEY
DIDN'T WANT TO GIVE UP POWER.
NOW I THINK THANKS TO MR. MORSI
AND THE ABYSMAL RULE OF HIS
COHORTS IN THE BROTHERHOOD, THE
MILITARY'S STOCK VALUE HAS RISEN
SIGNIFICANTLY.
SO THEY ARE SEEN AS THE SAVIORS
OF THE COUNTRY.
WE'LL SEE HOW LONG THAT LASTS,
OF COURSE.
THAT'S LIKELY TO CHANGE.
>> Brown: NANCY YOUSSEF, COME IN
ON THAT QUESTION, THE ROLE OF
THE MILITARY.
WHAT ARE THEY SAYING RIGHT NOW
AND WHAT ARE PEOPLE SAYING AUTBO
IT AND WHAT THE EXPECTATIONS ARE
>> WELL, IT'S A VERY COMPLICATED
AND I DARE SAY FICKLE
RELATIONSHIP AS EGYPTIANS HAVE
WITH THE MILITARY.
IT'S MENTIONED AS EGYPT'S ONLY
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION THAT
REPRESENTS EVERY SEGMENT OF
SOCIETY.
RIGHT NOW THERE'S OVERWHELMINGLY
EUPHORIA THAT THE MILITARY
STEPPED IN AND BROKE THIS LITTLE
IMPASSE WHICH HAS DEFINED THE
MORSI PRESIDENCY ALMOST FROM THE
MINUTE HE TOOK OFFICE 368 DAYS
AGO.
THAT SAID, THE 2011 UPRISING
THAT LED TO THE FALL OF FORRME
EGYPTIAN PSIDERENT HOSNI MUBARAK
WAS IN PART ABOUT REMOVING THE
MILITARY'S GRIP ON THE COUNTRY.
YES, THERE HAD BEEN CIVILIAN
PRESIDENTS FOR THE PAST SIX
DECADES BUT THE MILITARY WAS A
VERY KEY PLAYER IN THE
GOVERNANCE OF THIS COUNTRY.
SO THE IDEA THAT PEOPLE WHO TWO
YEARS AGO WERE CALLING FOR THE
MILITARY TO BE PUSHED ASIDE ARE
NOW CELEBRATING THAT THEY'VE
INTERVENED TO USURP BY ALL
MEASURES A LEGITIMATE ELECTION
IS STUNNING IN A WAY.
>> Brown: WHAT'S YOUR SENSE,
MICHELLE DUNNE, ABOUT WHETHER
THE MILITARY WILL HAND BACK
POWER, HOLD ON TO POWER?
>> IN TERMS OF THE RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE PEOPLE WITH THE
MILITARY I THINK IT HELPED THAT
THE DEFENSE MINISTER AND THE
CHIEF OF STAFF WERE CHANGED.
MORSI CHANGED THEM LAST AUGUST.
SO IT'S NOT THE SAME PEOPLE WHO
RULED THE COUNTRY FOR 18 MONTHS
SO UNPOPULARLY, AS SAMER SAID.
WHEN YOU SPEAK TO EGYPTIANS THEY
SAY "OH, NO, THE MILITARY
LEARNED ITS LESSON, IT WON'T TRY
TO HOLD ON TO CONTROL THIS
TIME."
I DON'T KNOW.
WHAT THEY DID DO THIS TIME IS
PUT A CIVILIAN FIGURE HEAD OUT
FRONT FROM THE START WHICH IS
THE HEAD OF THE SUPREME
CONSTITUTIONAL COURT.
BUT HE'S NOT A WELL-KNOWN OR
POWERFUL FIGURE.
THEY'VE ALSO SAID THEY'LL PUT A
TECHNOCRATIC CABINET IN PLACE
WHICH SUGGESTS NOT A POWERFUL
PRIME MINISTER.
SO THIS IS GOING TO BE MILITARY
RULE UNTIL THERE ARE NEW
ELECTIONS.
>> Brown: SAMER, WHAT ABOUT THE
ISSUE FOR THE U.S. AT THIS
MOMENT?
OR THE QUANDARY?
THERE'S ALREADY TALK ABOUT
REVIEWING THE AID THAT GOES TO
EGYPT, FOR EXAMPLE.
>> WELL, I THINKHAT T KIND OF
LANGUAGE IS GOING TO COME FROM
CONGRESS AND NOT COME FROM
EITHER THE STATE DEPARTMENT OR
THE WHITE HOUSE.
I DON'T THINK ANY OF THOSE
OFFICIALS ARE GOING TO USE THE
WORD COUP, FOR EXAMPLE, BECAUSE
THEY CLEARLY WANT TO MAINTAIN
THE RELATIONSHIP WITH THE
MILITARY AND I DON'T THINK-- AND
I THINK THIS IS CORRECT-- THEY
DON'T WANT TO COME OUT AGAINST
14, 16, 18 MILLION PEOPLE
DEMONSTRATING ON THE STREETS
AGAINST WHAT WAS A FAILED
PRESIDENCY.
>> Brown: WHAT DO YOU SEE AS THE
AMERICAN QUANDARY, MICHELLE
DUNNE.
>> I THINK IT'S THE QUANDARY
SAMER SAYS.
I THINK UNITED STATES HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY NOW TO TRY TO PRESS
FOR A MUCH MORE INCLUSIVE
TRANSITION AND, FOR EXAMPLE,
THAT THEY SHOULD SET THE RULES
OF THE GAME BEFORE THEY HOLD NEW
ELECTIONS.
THEY MADE THE MISTAKE OF HOLDING
BOTH PARLIAMENTARY AND
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS BEFORE
THEY HAD A NEW CONSTITUTION.
THAT CAUSED HUGE PROBLEMS.
SO I THINK THE UNITED STATES CAN
TRY NOW TO PRESS FOR A MORE
DEMOCRATIC TRANSITION IF THE
UNITED STATES WANTS TO BUT THEY
MAY CONTINUE TO PLAY A VERY
MINIMAL ROLE AND SAY LET'S JUST
KEEP OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH THE
MILITARY AND STAY OUT OF THIS.
>> Brown: NANCY YUSSOEF, YOU
STARTED BY TELLING US WE COULD
HEAR PEOPLE IN THE BACKGROUND
STILL VERY LATE AT NIGHT.
IS THE EXPECTATION THAT PEOPLE
STAY IN THE STREETS?
IS THERE A REAL FEAR OF
POTENTIAL VIOLENCE IN THE HOURS
AND DAYS AHEAD?
>> YES, WE SAW THAT IN THAT
THERE WERE MILITARY TANKS AND
SOLDIERS STATIONED ALL AROUND
THE PRO-MORSI SUPPORTERS IN THE
RUNUP TO THIS ANNOUNCEMENT.
THERE ARE MILITARY HELICOPTERS
FLYING OVERHEAD NOW.
THERE'S AN EFFORT TO SECURE THE
SITUATION BEFORE THE
ANNOUNCEMENT STARTED AND WE'VE
ALREADY HEARD OF REPORTS OF
VIOLENCE IN OTHER PROVINCES
OUTSIDE OF CAIRO.
I PERSONALLY SAW CLASHES TODAY
BETWEEN PRO AND ANTI-MORSI
CAMPS.
THERE IS A SENSE OF TEIONNS AND
THE LANGUAGE THAT'S BEING USED
BY MORSI SUPPORTERS IS
WORRISOME.
REMEMBER THAT MORSI YESTERDAY
GAVE A SPEECH IN WHICH HE SAID
HE WAS WILLING TO SACRIFICE HIS
BLOOD FOR THE THIS JOB, FOR
LEGITIMACY, AS HE PUT IT.
MANY SUPPORTERS TOOK THAT AS A
CALL FOR THEM TO BE PREPARED TO
DIE FOR THIS MISSION.
THAT IS PROTECTING THE MORSI
PRESIDENCY.
SO WE'LL SEE IF THEY STEP UP
TOMORROW.
THE THINGS THAT WE'VE OBSERVED
IN THE LAST FEW DAYS IS THAT THE
ONCE INTIMIDATING PROTESTS
MOUNTED BY THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD HAVE BEEN QUITE
SMALL COMPARED TO THE ANTI-MORSI
DEMONSTRATIONS WHICH SPEAKS TO
THE WEAKNESS WHEN THEY HAVE TO
CONFRONT OPPOSITION THROUGHOUT
THE COUNTRY AND CAN'T BUS PEOPLE
IN TO VARIOUS PROTESTS IN THE
CAPITAL OR ALEXANDRIA.
>> Brown: NANCY USE THEY HAVE?
CAIRO, SAMER SHEHATA AND
MICHELLE DUNNE HERE IN
WASHINGTON.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR, THE DELAY ON MANDATORY
HEALTH CARE COVERAGE.
THE DIPLOMATIC DRAMA
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRICE OF OIL
SPIKED TODAY, AS EGYPT'S
CHANGING POLITICAL SITUATION
UNFOLDED.
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN OVER A
YEAR THE COST OF A BARREL PASSED
THE $102 MARK.
IT ENDED THE DAY IN NEW YORK
TRADING UP MORE THAN A DOLLAR
AND A HALF TO CLOSE ABOVE $101.
OIL MARKETS WEREN'T THE ONLY
ONES IN TURMOIL-- EUROPEAN
FINANCIAL MARKETS WERE JOLTED BY
A DEEPENING POLITICAL CRISIS IN
PORTUGAL.
PRIME MINISTER PEDRO PASSOS
COELHO REFUSED TO STEP DOWN EVEN
THOUGH TWO TOP MINISTERS
RESIGNED THIS WEEK IN PROTEST OF
NEW AUSTERITY MEASURES.
COELHO TOLD REPORTERS IN BERLIN
HE WAS HOPEFUL HIS CENTER-RIGHT
COALITION GOVERNMENT WOULD BE
ABLE TO FIND A SOLUTION TO AVOID
COLLAPSE.
>> (translated): I WILL NOT
RESIGN BECAUSE I DON'T HAVE ANY
REASON TO RESIGN.
I DON'T SEE AN IMPORTANT REASON
TO LOSE MAJORITY IN THE
PARLIAMENT, BECAUSE THERE IS NO
BIG ISSUE IN POLITICAL TERMS
JUSTIFYING A FALL OF THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CRISIS COULD
ALSO JEOPARDIZE PORTUGAL'S
INTERNATIONAL BAILOUT AT A TIME
WHEN THE COUNTRY IS SUFFERING
ITS WORST RECESSION SINCE THE
1970s WITH 18% UNEMPLOYMENT.
THE FINANCIAL TURMOIL IN EUROPE
AND THE CRISIS IN EGYPT WERE NOT
ENOUGH TO DAMPEN STOCKS ON WALL
STREET.
THEY CLIMBED HIGHER, IN A
SHORTENED DAY OF TRADING, ON
ENCOURAGING NEWS ABOUT THE
AMERICAN JOB MARKET.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 56 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
14,988.
THE NASDAQ ROSE TEN POINTS TO
CLOSE ABOVE 3,443.
FRANCE CALLED TODAY FOR A TWO-
WEEK SUSPENSION OF FREE TRADE
TALKS BETWEEN THE U.S. AND THE
EUROPEAN UNION.
IT ORDERED THE TEMPORARY DELAY
IN THE WAKE OF RECENT CLAIMS THE
U.S. SPIED ON ITS EUROPEAN
ALLIES' OFFICES.
SO FAR, THE E.U. COMMISSION HAS
YET TO AGREE TO POSTPONE THE
TRADE NEGOTIATIONS SCHEDULED TO
BEGIN MONDAY IN WASHINGTON.
IN PAKISTAN, AT LEAST 16
SUSPECTED MILITANTS DIED IN A
PRE-DAWN U.S. DRONE STRIKE
TODAY, ACCORDING TO PAKISTANI
INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS.
THE RAID HAPPENED IN THE NORTH
WAZIRISTAN TRIBAL REGION.
IT WAS BELIEVED TO TARGET
MEMBERS OF THE HAQQANI NETWORK
FROM NEIGHBORING AFGHANISTAN.
THE PAKISTANI GOVERNMENT
DENOUNCED THE ATTACK AS A
VIOLATION OF ITS SOVEREIGNTY.
THE FIRST DECADE OF THIS
MILLENIUM SAW RECORD HIGH
TEMPERATURES AROUND THE WORLD
AND A FASTER WARMING TREND.
THE REPORT FROM THE U.N.'S WORLD
METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION
FOUND EVERY YEAR OF THE PAST
DECADE, EXCEPT 2008, WAS AMONG
THE TEN WARMEST SINCE RECORDS
STARTED IN THE 1850s.
CLIMATE EXPERTS ALSO FOUND THE
DECADE WAS UNPRECEDENTED IN ITS
EXTREMES: HEAT WAVES IN EUROPE
AND RUSSIA, DROUGHTS IN THE
AMAZON BASIN AND SEVERAL HUGE
HURRICANES.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: WE LOOK AT THE FALLOUT
FROM THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION'S
DECISION TO DELAY AN INSURANCE
MANDATE FOR EMPLOYERS.
UNDER THE HEALTH REFORM LAW,
COMPANIES WITH 50 OR MORE FULL-
TIME WORKERS WERE REQUIRED TO
PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR EMPLOYEES
BEGINNING NEXT JANUARY OR PAY A
PENALTY OF $2,000 PER EMPLOYEE.
BUT THE ADMINISTRATION SURPRISED
MANY YESTERDAY WHEN IT SAID IT
WILL POSTPONE THAT REQUIREMENT
UNTIL 2015.
OTHER MAJOR PARTS OF THE LAW--
SUCH AS AN INDIVIDUAL MANDATE
AND NEW SUBSIDIZED INSURANCE
EXCHANGES-- WILL STILL TAKE
EFFECT AS SCHEDULED.
EMPLOYERS PRAISED THE DECISION,
BUT REPUBLICANS SAID THE DELAY
WAS A SIGN OF UNDERLYING
WEAKNESS.
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER SAID
"IT MEANS EVEN THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION KNOWS THE TRAIN
WRECK WILL ONLY GET WORSE."
TWO VIEWS NOW: RON POLLACK IS
WITH FAMILIES USA, WHICH BACKS
THE LAW AND IS WORKING TO
INCREASE ENROLLMENT.
AND TOM MILLER OF THE AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE.
HE'S THE CO-AUTHOR OF THE BOOK
"WHY OBAMACARE IS WRONG FOR
AMERICA."
WELCOME TO BOTH OF YOU.
RON POLLACK WHAT IS YOUR SENSE
OF THE REASON OF THIS NEW DELAY?
>>  I THINK IT'S LARGELY
EMPLOYERS WERE COMPLAINING ABOUT
THE PAPERWORK AND THE
ADMINISTRATION RESPONDED TO
THAT.
BUT I HAVE TO SAY, GWEN THIS IS
MUCH ADO ABOUT FAIRLY LITTLE IN
THE FOLLOWING SENSE.
AS YOU ACCURATELY INDICATED THIS
MANDATE ONLY APPLIES TO LARGE
BUSINESSES.
THOSE THAT HAVE MORE THAN 50
WORKERS.
AND IF YOU TAKE A LOOK AT THE
BUSINESSES THAT HAVE MORE THAN
50 WORKERS MORE THAN 94% OF THEM
ALREADY PROVIDE HEALTH CARE
COVERAGE.
IT'S ABOUT 6%, A LITTLE LESS
THAN 6% THAT DON'T PROVIDE THIS
COVERAGE.
THE QUESTION IS WHAT IMPACT
MIGHT IT HAVE WITH RESPECT TO
THAT 6%.
AND OF COURSE WE DON'T KNOW
WHETHER THE MANDATE WOULD HAVE
ACTUALLY RESULTED IN MANY OF
THOSE COMPANIES DECIDING TO
PROVIDE COVERAGE.
BUT THE KEY ASPECTS OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, WHICH ARE
DESIGNED TO EXPAND COVERAGE,
THOSE THINGS ARE MOVING FORWARD,
THIS THING IS NOT BUT IT IS NOT
LIKELY TO HAVE A SIGNIFICANT
IMPACT ON PEOPLE WHO CURRENTLY
DON'T HAVE COVERAGE.
>> TOM MILLER IS THIS MUCH TO DO
ABOUT NOTHING, JUST ABOUT
PAPERWORK?
>>
>>  TAKE CARE OF THE OTHER ITEMS
ALONG THE WAY.
THEY WERE ON THE TRAIN, IT
WASN'T CABOOSE OR NORMAL TRAIN
WRECK BUT IT IS AN INDICATOR OF
OTHER SERIOUS PROBLEMS AHEAD.
ALL THE PIECES OF THIS LAW ARE
INTERCONNECTED.
THE EMPLOYER MANDATE WAS LARGELY
PASSED TO TRY TO HIDE THE COSTS
OF THE LAW TO BASICALLY SAY WELL
THE EMPLOYERS ARE GOING TO PAY
FOR IT.
THIS SUGGESTED THE COMPLEXITY OF
WHAT IS BEING PUSHED THROUGH THE
CHUTE OFTEN IN VERY INFORMAL
GUIDANCE.
EARLIER THIS WEEK WHAT WE HAD
WAS POLICY MAKING BY BLOG NOT
EVEN A FORMAL RULE.
WE WAITED FOR THE HANDS.
BOTH THE SUPPORTERS OF THE LAW
AND THE OPPONENTS THERE'S A
GREAT DEAL OF UNCERTAINTY.
WHAT IS GOING TO HAPPEN NEXT.
THEY SAY THINGS ARE SUPPOSED TO
HAPPEN, CONGRESS PASSED A LAW
THAT SAID THERE WILL BE EMPLOYER
MANDATE IN 2014 THE
ADMINISTRATION SAYS, THAT WAS AN
INTERESTING SUGGESTION, WE'LL
GET BACK TO YOU IN THAT IN A
YEAR.
IT SUGGESTS A DEGREE OF
HAPHAZARD RULE MAKING AND POLICY
MAKING, WHATEVER WILL WORK IN
ORDER TO GET SOMETHING GOING OUT
THE DOOR.
>> Ifill:  IF IT'S TRUE, IF I
GET THAT YOU AGREE THAT THERE
WAS SOME CONCERNS OF ONEROUS --
>> INFORMATION.
>> Ifill:  PAPERWORK, OKAY,
PAPERWORK.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS, CAN WE
AGREE ON THAT?
>>  WHICH TIES IN TO OTHER
REGULATIONS.
>> Ifill:  WHAT WERE THEY?
>>  WHAT EMPLOYERS HAVE TO DO IS
THEY HAVE TO PROVIDE INFORMATION
NOT JUST ABOUT HOWMANY  WORKERS
THEY HAVE AND WHETHER THEY
PROVIDE OR DON'T PROVIDE
COVERAGE.
BUT THE PURPOSE OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT WAS TO MAKE
SURE THAT EVERYBODY HAS HA
DECENT STANDARD OF COVERAGE,
THAT IS REELLY COMPREHENSIVE.
WHAT EMPLOYERS NEED TO DO IS
THEY NEED TO PROVIDE INFORMATION
ABOUT WHAT KIND OF COVERAGE THEY
PROVIDE, WHAT KIND OF
DEDUCTIBLES, WHAT KIND OF
COPAYMENTS, WHAT BENEFITS ARE
TRULY COVERED.
AND ULTIMATELY EMPLOYERS HAVE TO
COVER A CERTAIN SO-CALLED
ACTUARIAL VALUE AND A LOT OF THE
EMPLOYERS WERE SAYING, THIS IS
FAIRLY ONEROUS.
>> Ifill:  IT'S BEEN MORE THAN
A YEAR SINCE THE LAW WAS
ENACTED, WHY ARE WE JUST --
>> THREE YEARS.
>> Ifill:  OKAY, MORE THAN A
YEAR.
>>  TWELVE YEARS MAYBE.
>> Ifill:  WHY DID IT TAKE SO
LONG TO FIGURE THAT THIS
DEADLINE COULD NOT BE MET?
>>  THERE'S BEEN AN ONGOING
DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE
ADMINISTRATION AND THE EMPLOYER
COMMUNITY.
THE EMPLOYER COMMUNITY WAS
EXPRESSING CONCERN ABOUT THE
PAPERWORK AND SO THE
ADMINISTRATION TRIED TO RESPOND
TO THAT.
MIND YOU, THE ADMINISTRATION IS
KEEPING ITS EYES ON THE KEY
PRIZE WHICH IS NAMELY MAKING
SURE THAT THE KEY ELEMENTS OF
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT GET
IMPLEMENTED.
THE KEY ELEMENTS INCLUDE
CREATING THESE NEW MARKET
PLACES, THESE SO-CALLED
EXCHANGES AND FOR PEOPLE WITH
INCOMES BELOW 400% OF POVERTY
FOR FAMILY OF FOUR, THAT'S
$94,200 FOR ON INDIVIDUAL THAT
IS 46,000.
THAT THEY WILL GET THESE
SUBSIDIES THAT WILL MAKE
COVERAGE AFFORDABLE.
AND THEY'RE TRYING TO MAKE SURE
THAT IN THE STATES THAT HAVE
DECIDED TO EXPAND THE MEDICAID
PROGRAM THAT THAT WILL BE
PROPERLY IMPLEMENTED.
THOSE ARE THE KEY ELEMENTS THAT
WILL GET PEOPLE ADDITIONAL
COVERAGE.
>> Ifill:  DO YOU THINK THAT
BECAUSE THEY HAVE HAD SOME
TROUBLE IMPLEMENTING THIS IN A
TIMELY WAY, FOR NOW, THAT THAT
WOULD SPEAK TO OTHER ELEMENTS,
THESE CRITICAL ELEMENTS?
>>  THERE'S BLOOD IN THE WATER.
THE FOLKS THAT ARE LOOKING FOR
FURTHER DELAYS OR THIS ISN'T
GOING TO WORK OR MAYBE I SHOULD
LOOK IN TO GETTING THAT COVERAGE
BECAUSE I'M HEARING A LOT OF
THINGS THAT IT DOESN'T LOOK LIKE
IT'S GOING TO WORK OUT FOR ME.
INERTIA IS A VERY POWERFUL FORCE
AMONG THE UNINSURED.
>> Ifill:  WHAT EVIDENCE TO
THAT SORT OF CONVERSATION?
>>  WE HAVEN'T HAD THE
ENROLLMENT YET.
BUT TO THE EXTENT THAT PEOPLE
ARE HEARING ABOUT PREMIUM
SPIKES, PARTICULARLY IF YOU ARE
A YOUNGER, HEALTHY MALE SO IT'S
GOING TO COST YOU MORE MONEY.
THEN THERE'S GOING TO BE READY
ON TIME.
THE EXCHANGES WE'VE GOT ABOUT
HALF THE STATES NOT -- MORE THAN
HALF OF THE STATES SAME THING
WITH THE MEDICAID EXPANSION, ALL
THAT CREATES A CLOUD OVER SIMPLY
THE ABILITY TO EXECUTE.
NOW, YOU TALK ABOUT THE BUSINESS
COMMUNITY, THERE ARE TWO
BUSINESS COMMUNITIES HERE.
THERE'S THE LARGE BUSINESS
COMMUNITY WHICH SAYS, JUST MAKE
OUR LIFE A LITTLE BIT EASIERU
YOU'RE BEING ONEROUS, MAKE THE
PAPERWORK NOT AS BAD.
THE SMALLER BUSINESS COMMUNITY
THAT DUMP -- BUMPS UP TO THE
THRESHOLDS THEY ARE MORE
CONCERNED ABOUT COMPLEXITY OF
DETERMINING WHETHER THEY HAVE 50
EMPLOYEES, HAVE PART TIME
EMPLOYEES, THAT'S THE OTHER
COMPONENT OF THE REPORTING
REQUIREMENTS WHICH THEY WERE
COMPLAINING ABOUT.
>>  I HAVE TO BUILD ON WHAT TOM
WAS SAYING.
THE SMALL BUSINESSES ARE THE
BUSINESSES THAT TEND NOT TO
PROVIDE COVERAGE FOR THEIR
WORKERS.
THEY'RE THE ONES WHO REALLY WE
WANT TO HELP THEM PROVIDE
COVERAGE DASH.
>> Ifill:  MOST LARGE
CORPORATIONS ARE UNA AFFECTED.
>>  THEY HAVE DECIDED TO --
RICH COMPANIES.
>>  BECAUSE IT'S A GOOD WAY OF
ATTRACTING THE BEST EMPLOYEES.
>> Ifill:  OKAY.
>>  IT'S THE SMALL BUSINESSES
THAT DON'T PROVIDE COVERAGE
ANYWHERE NEAR LIKE THE BIG
BUSINESSES DO.
WHAT THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
DOES IS IT PROVIDES RELIEF FOR
SMALL BUSINESSES, THOSE SMALL
BUSINESSES WITH FEWER THAN 25
WORKERS THEY GET TAX CREDIT
SUBSIDIES TO HELP PAY FOR THE
COVERAGE FOR THEIR WORKERS.
TODAY UNDER AFFORDABLE COMPARE
ACT THEY CAN GET AS MUCH HAS 35%
OF THE COSTS.
COMING JANUARY 1, IT WILL BE
50%.
SO THE REAL PROBLEM WITH RESPECT
TO EMPLOYERS IS REALLY BEING
ADDRESSED AND WE'LL CONTINUE TO
BE ADDRESSED.
>>  NOW, LIKE MANY OF THE
PROVISIONS OF THE AFFORDABLE
COMPARE ACT THERE IS WHAT IS
PROMISED AND WHAT'S DIFFERED
THAT EXAMPLE IS THE SMALL
BUSINESS TAX CREDITS.
PLENTY OF REVIEWS, THE TAKE UP
OF IT IS MICROSCOPIC COMPARED TO
WHAT WAS EXPECTED.
GAO REPORTS ON THAT, JUST LIKE
WE HAD A DIFFERENT, A FUND FOR
PREEXISTING CONDITIONS IT TURNED
OUT FEWER PEOPLE ENROLLED AND
THEY BLEW OUT THEIR BUDGET.
SUPPOSED TO BE A REQUIREMENT IN
THE NEW EXCHANGE FOR BUSINESSES
THAT EMPLOYEES WOULD HAVE A
CHOICE OF PLANS, SORRY WE CAN'T
GET TO THAT THIS YEAR.
SO WHAT WE HAVE IS TIME AFTER
TIME WHAT'S BEING PROMISED IN
THE EARLY STAGES, THAT CAN'T BE
EXECUTED.
>> Ifill:  IF THERE IS BLOOD
IN THE WATER WHAT IS NEXT?
>>  WHAT IS NEXT IS REALLY
FOCUSING ON GETTING THESE NEW
MARKET PLACES SET UP AND GETTING
THE TAX -- SUBSIDIES FOR
INDIVIDUALS, THAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN, ENROLLMENT PERIOD BEGINS
ON OCTOBER 1.
IT'S A SIX-MONTH ENROLLMENT
PERIOD AND IT'S GOING TO BE
REALLY IMPORTANT THAT PEOPLE ABW
OPPORTUNITIESF THEY ENROLL PRIOR
TO JANUARY 1, THEY WILL RECEIVE
THESE BENEFITS STARTING IN
JANUARY.
>> Ifill:  FINAL WORD.
>>  THERE'S A PROBLEM OF
MATCHING THIS UP, WE NOW DON'T
KNOW WHAT EMPLOYER COVERAGE
THEY'RE BEING OFFERED.
PEOPLE CAN WALK IN SAY I'M
ENTITLED TO MY EX CHANGE SUBSIDY
A NO WAY TO VERIFY IT.
>> Ifill:  WE'LL SEE IF
ANOTHER SHOE DROPS.
RON POLLACK, RON MILLER AND
AUTHOR "WHY HOE BAMA COMPARE IS
WRONG FOR AMERICA."
WE HAVE MORE ON WHAT THE DELAY
MEANS FOR AMERICANS, HEALTH CARE
COVERAGE ON OUR HEALTH PAGE.
>> Brown: THE DIPLOMATIC FALLOUT
OVER N.S.A. LEAKER EDWARD
SNOWDEN AND THE REVELATIONS HE'S
PROVIDED TOOK ANOTHER TURN
TODAY.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THE STORY.
>> Suarez: BOLIVIAN PRESIDENT
EVO MORALES BOARDED HIS PLE INAN
VIENNA TODAY.
HOURS AFTER BEING STRANDED AT
THE AIRPORT AS AUSTRIAN
AUTHORITIES, WITH HIS
PERMISSION, SEARCHED THE
AIRCRAFT IN VAIN FOR FUGITIVE
EDWARD SNOWDEN.
RETURNING FROM AN ENERGY SUMMIT
IN MOSCOW LAST NIGHT, MORALES
LANDED IN VIENNA AFTER BEING
DENIED ENTRY TO ILIANTA, FRENCH,
PORTUGUESE AND SPANISH AIRSPACE-
- A MOVE THAT ENRAGED BOLIVIAN
AUTHORITIES.
>> (translated): PORTUGAL
NEEDS TO EXPLAIN TO US, FRANCE
NEEDS TO EXPLAIN TO US WHY THEY
HAD CANCELLED PERMISSION TO USE
THEIR AIRSPACE.
BESIDES, THIS PLANE IS FRENCH
AND HAS PILOTS TRAINED IN
FRANCE.
WE ARE IN COMMUNICATION WITH
AUTHORITIES.
>> Suarez: BUT TODAY THERE WAS
CONFUSION AS THOSE COUNTRIES
DENIED REFUSING MORALES'
PASSAGE.
AND IN VIENNA, MORALES TOLD
REPORTERS IT'S UNCLEAR WHY HE
WAS SUSPECTED OF HARBORING
SNOWDEN IN THE FIRSPLACT E.
>> (translated): OF COURSE,
HOW CAN WE HAVE ON OUR PLANE A
PERSON WHO IS HAVING PROBLEMS
WITH ANOTHER COUNTRY.
WE ARE VERY RESPONSIBLE IN WHAT
WE DO AND WE ARE ALSO VERY
RESPONSIBLE AS REGARDS
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS.
>> Suarez: SNOWDEN HIMSELF
REMAINS OUT OF SIGHT, REPORTEDLY
STILL IN THE TRANSIT AREA OF THE
MOSCOW AIRPORT AS HE APPLIES FOR
ASYLUM IN SOME 20 COUNTRIES.
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT HAS ISSUED
BROAD WARNINGS TO COUNTRIES
CONSIDERING THOSE REQUESTS, AND
MANY HAVE ALREADY DECLINED OR
SAID SNOWDEN MUST BE ON THEIR
SOIL TO APPLY.
FOR ITS PART LA PAZ HAS ACCUSED
THE U.S. OF PRESSURING THE
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES TO BLOCK
MORALES' PLANE.
IN WASHINGTON TODAY, A STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKESWOMAN WOULDN'T
CONFIRM OR DENY THAT.
>> WE HAVE BEEN IN CONTACT WITH
A RANGE OF COUNTRIES ACROSS THE
WORLD THAT HAD ANY CHANCE OF
HAVING MR. SNOWDEN LAND OR EVEN
TRANSIT THROUGH THEIR COUNTRIES
BUT I'M NOT GOING TO OUTLINE
WHEN THOSE WERE OR WHAT THOSE
COUNTRIES HAVE BEEN.
>> Suarez: AS THE FIGHT FOR
SNOWDEN'S FATE DRAGS ON, THERE'S
NEW FALLOUT OVER THE CLASSIFIED
DOCUMENTS HE REVEALED.
"THE GUARDIAN" NEWSPAPER IN
LONDON CITED THOSE WHEN IT
REPORTED SUNDAY THE U.S. HAS
BEEN SPYING ON THE EUROPEAN
UNION MISSIONS IN NEW YORK AND
WASHINGTONAS W, ELL AS ON THE
EMBASSIES OF DOZENS OF OTHER
COUNTRIES.
SPEAKING IN NEW DELHI TODAY, A
SPOKESMAN FOR INDIA'S FOREIGN
>> Suarez: MEANWHILE IN EUROPE,
FRANCE SAID IT'S DELAYING TRADE
TALKS WITH THE U.S. BY TWO
WEEKS.
AND GERMANY'S FOREIGN MINISTER
ANNOUNCED HIS COUNTRY WILL SEND
A DELEGATION TO WASHINGTON NEXT
WEEK TO MEET WITH ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC HOLDER TO DISCUSS
HOW THE U.S. GATHERS
INTELLIGENCE.
FOR MORE I'M JOINED BY P.J.
CROWLEY, FORMER ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR PUBLIC
AFFAIRS.
HE'S NOW A FELLOW AT GEORGE
WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY.
AND JAMES LEWIS, DIRECTOR OF THE
TECHNOLOGY AND PUBLIC POLICY
PROGRAM AT THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES IN WASHINGTON.
EDWARD SNOWDEN HAS THROWN THE
NET WIDE.
ADVANCED INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACIES.
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, LATIN
AMERICA, ASIA, EUROPE, NATO
ALLIES, MILITARY NEUTRALS, NO
TAKERS.
WHAT DOES THIS TELL US ABOUT THE
PERSUASIVE POWER OF THE UNITED
STATES?
>> IT TELLS YOU ABOUT EDWARD
SNOWDEN AS A HOT POTATO.
WHEN THE MUSIC STOPS, NO COUNTRY
OR NO LEADER WANTS TO BE THE ONE
LEFT HOLDING EDWARD SNOWDEN IN
ITS LAP.
OBVIOUSLY THE UNITED STATES HAS
MADE CLEAR AT ANY POINTS TO SEE
EDWARD SNOWDEN BACK IN THE
UNITED STATES BEFORE A JUDGE AND
JURY AND HAS BEEN SUCCESSFUL, I
THINK, PARTICULARLY IN THIS
ATMOSPHERE, WITH LEADERS WHO ARE
COMPETING TO BE  HEMISPHERE,
WITH LEADERS WHO ARE COMPETING
TO BE THE AMERICAN ANTAGONIST IN
CHIEF.
>> Suarez: JAMES LEWIS, HOW DO
YOU EXPLAIN THAT COUNTRIES WHO
LOOK FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO
EMBARRASS OR ANTAGONIZE THE
UNITED STATES AND MIGHT VERY
MUCH WANT TO KNOW WHAT'S ON
EDWARD SNOWDEN'S HARD DRIVES
AREN'T TAKING HIM EITHER?
>> PART OF IT IS WHAT MAY BE ON
SNOWDEN'S HARD DRIVES MAY NOT BE
AS VALUABLE AS THOUGHT.
A LOT OF PLACES NEW WE WERE
SPYING.
COUNTRY, WEIGHING WHAT DO I GET
OUT OF TAKING HIM AND WHAT DO I
LOSE?
THEY'RE LOOKING AT THIS AS A
BUSINESS ARRANGEMENT.
DO THEY GET SIGNIFICANT -- MOST
OF THEM COME TO THE CONCLUSION
THAT IT'S NOT
>> Suarez: WHAT DO I LOSE?
WHAT DOES LEVERAGE CONSIST OF IN
2013?
>> WITH ECUADOR, THERE IS AN
UPCOMING VOTE ON TRADE THAT GAVE
THE UNITED STATES TREMENDOUS
RELATIONS.
WITH CHINA AND RUSSIA, WHAT THEY
WOULD GET FROM SNOWDEN DOESN'T
JUSTIFY DAMAGING THEIR MOST
IMPORTANT RELATIONSHIP.
THE EUROPES, ALLIES, WHO IS
LEFT?
REALLY, SMALL COUNTRIES THAT
DON'T LIKE AMERICA AND WANT TO
MAYBE PLAY A LITTLE FAST AND
LOOSE WITH THE LAW.
>> Suarez: IS THE MAP OF THE
WORLD, P.J. CWLEYRO, A LITTLE
LESS PROMISING THAN IT WAS A
GENERATION AGO FOR SOMEONE WHO
IS AN INTERNATIONAL FUGITIVE?
>> FOR SOMEONE LIKE EDWARD
SNOWDEN, THERE ARE PLACES HE
MIGHT WANT TO GO AND THERE ARE
PROBABLY PLACES HE DOESN'T WANT
TO GO.
PYONGYANG MIGHT BE A DESTINATION
FOR HIM, BUT I WOULDN'T WANT TO
LIVE THERE.
IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD, THERE IS
A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN POLITICAL
GAIN AND REAL NATIONAL INTEREST.
I THINK TO SAY RAFAEL CARRERA OF
ECUADOR, WHO RECOGNIZES THAT THE
ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES AND ECUADOR IS
VERY IMPORTANT TO HIM, HE
OBVIOUSLY HAS SHELTERED JULIAN
ASSANG IN HIS EMBASSY IN LONDON
-- ASSANGE IN HIS EMBASSY IN
LONDON, IT WAS A RESPECTFUL CALL
FROM THE VICE PRESIDENT TO
PRESIDENT CORREIA, A
DEMONSTRATION OF RESPECT BUT
ALSO PROBABLY I'M SURE A REVIEW
OF THE INTEREST THAT ECUADOR
HAS, AND THE IMPLICATIONS AS JIM
WAS MENTIONING THAT NOT ONLY IS
THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH TRYING TO
MANAGE THE SNOWDEN ISSUE BUT
CONGRESS IS SPRING-LOADED TO
PUNISH WHOEVER MIGHT BE WILLING
TO ACCEPT HIM.
>> Suarez: JAMES LEWIS, EDWARD
SNOWDEN HAS GOTTEN THIS
WORLDWIDE ATTENTION BECAUSE OF
WHAT HE'S TAKEN OUT OF
COMPUTERS.
THE CHINESE DID NOT MAKE IT EASY
FOR HIM TO REMAIN THERE.
WOULD THAT HAVE COMPLICATED THE
UPCOMING BILATERAL MEETINGS
BETWEEN CHINA AND THE UNITED
STATES OVER CYBER ESPIONAGE AND
CYBER CRIME?
>> TO COME UP WITH AN ORIGINAL
PHRASE, SNOWDEN IS A HOT POTATO
AND NOBODY WANTS HIM BECAUSE
IT'S JUST GOING TO MESS UP THE
RELATIONSHIP, PARTICULARLY FOR
THE CHINESE WHEN YOU HAD
PRESIDENT JI COME TO CALIFORNIA,
A GOOD SUMMIT, JI TALKING ABOUT
RESETTING THE RELATIONSHIP, THE
LAST THING HE NEEDS IS SNOWDEN
SHOWING UP IN HONG KONG.
THEY WERE EAGER TO GET RID OF
HIM AND DID A GOOD JOB.
THEY MANAGED TO ANOIT U.S. AND
RUSSIA AT THE SAME TIME WHOUT
GETTING A LOT OF TAR ON
THEMSELVES.
-- WITHOUT GETTING A LOT OF TAR
ON THEMSELVES.
>> Woodruff: BEING ASKED THE
QUESTION --
>> Suarez: BEING ASKED THE
QUESTION, YOU HAVE TO ANSWER IT
BUT YOU DON'T WANT TO SAY MUCH.
IS THERE A LOT THAT GOES ON IN
BACK CHANNELS THAT WE MAY NEVER
KNOW ABOUT THIS CASE AND OTHERS
OF ITS LIKE?
>> IT'S A CAREFUL BALANCING ACT.
CLEARLY, BOTH PUBLICLY AND
PRIVATELY THE UNITED STATES HAS
TOLD THE WORLD AND COUNTRIES
THIS IS IMPORTANT TO US, WE WANT
THIS GUY BACK.
BY THE SAME TOKEN, YOU DON'T
WANT TO MAKE EDWARD SNOWDEN THE
FACE OF ANY RELATIONSHIP, THE BE
ALL AND END ALL OF ANY
RELATIONSHIP.
I THINK THAT'S ONE OF THE
REASONS WHY A PRETTY
SOPHISTICATED PLAY BY CHINA.
THEY WERE FACING A LEGAL PROCESS
IN HONG KONG THAT MIGHT HAVE
TAKEN MONTHS.
YOU CAN SEE WITH VLADIMIR PUTIN
WHO NOW HAS HIM, WANTS TO GET
RID MUCH HIM AND HAS NO ONE TO
HAND HIM OFF TO, THE CHINESE
SAID WHAT DO WE WANT WITH HIM?
THEY WHISPERED IN HIS EAR
"YOU'VE GOT TO GO."
WHAT WE SAW YESTERDAY IN THE
INTERPLAY OVER THE POTENTIAL
THAT HE MIGHT LAND IN EVO
MORALES'S AIRPLANE NOT A CASE OF
THE UNITED STATES PLAYING
OFFENSIVE, I THINK IT WAS A CASE
OF COUNTRIES PLAYING DEFENSE
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE A EUROPEAN
LEADER RIGHT NOW, YOUR BEST
FRIEND IS THE UNITED STATES,
VERY IMPORTANT RELATIONSHIP.
YOU'VE GOT SOME PUBLIC SENTIMENT
IN EUROPE.
IT'S NOT SO MUCH ABOUT SNOWDEN
PER SE BUT HE REVEALED SOME
THINGS THAT TOUCH ON PRIVACY IN
EUROPE, A VERY SENSITIVE ISSUE,
SO THERE IS SOME PUBLIC SYMPATHY
FOR WHAT SNOWDEN REPRESENTS AND
THESE LEADERS ONE BY ONE SAID "I
CAN'T TAKE A RISK THAT SNOWDEN
IS ON THAT AIRPLANE SO WHY DO I
WANT TO WALK INTO THAT BRIAR
PATCH?"
>> Suarez: JAMES LEWIS, THERE
WAS ANGER IN EUROPE FEIGNED OR
REAL ABOUT THE ALLEGATIONS OF
SPYING.
YES, EDWARD SNOWDEN CAN STAY BUT
HE CAN'T KEEP RELEASING THINGS
-- THEN HE ALMOST CAUGHT HIMSELF
AND SAID THAT MAY SOUND STRANGE
COMING OUT OF MY LIPS.
IS THIS A GAME WHERE ALL THE
PLAYERS UNDERSTAND THEY HAVE AN
INTEREST EVEN IF THEY'RE NOT
FRIENDS?
>> YEAH, AND I THINK PRESIDENT
PUTIN WINS THE PRIZE FOR THE
BEST LINE SO FAR IN THIS EPISODE
BUT EVERYONE IS LOOKING AT THIS
AS A POLITICAL ISSUE.
NO ONE IS LOOKING AT IT AS
SNOWDEN PER SE.
THEY'RE ASKING HOW WOULD THIS
AFFECT MY RELATIONS WITH THE
U.S.?
WHAT DO I GET THAT'S A BENEFIT
FROM GIVING THIS KID ASYLUM,
PARTICULARLY WHEN THE ST
HAS ON HIS COMPUTER THEY MAY
ALREADY HAVE OR AT LEAST KNOW
ABOUT, SO HE'S IN AN AWKWARD
PLACE AND EVERY COUNTRY IS
LOOKING AT THIS AS A POLITICAL
ISSUE.
>> Suarez: JAMES LEWIS, P.J.
CROWLEY, GOOD TO TALK TO YOU
BOTH.
>> THANKS, RAY.
>> Ifill: NEXT, AN UPDATE ON
MOVES TO IMPROVE CONDITIONS FOR
WORKERS IN BANGLADESH AFTER THE
TRAGEDY AT A CLOTHING FACTORY
EARLIER THIS YEAR.
A DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION
DEDICATED TO TACKLG POINVERTY IS
OFFERING A HAND.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FRED DE
SAM LAZARO HAS THE STORY,
ANOTHER IN OUR SERIES: AGENTS
FOR CHANGE.
>> Reporter: THIS IS WHAT'S LEFT
OF RANA PLAZA, THE SEVEN-STORY
BUILDING THAT COLLAPSED IN
APRIL: A MEMORIAL, ALREADY
WEATHERED BY HEAT AND MONSOONS,
TO THE DEADLIEST OF BANGLADESH'S
RECENT GARMENT FACTORY
DISASTERS.
THE DEATH TOLL HERE: 1,127 AND
COUNTING.
>> MANY VICTIMS OF THE RANA
PLAZA TRAGEDY MAY NEVER BE
ACCOUNTED FOR.
MORE THAN 200 BODIES, SOME
DECOMPOSED BEYOND RECOGNITION,
HAD TO BE BURIED BEFORE THEY
COULD BE IDENTIFIED.
>> (translated): I'M TIRED, I
HAVE NO ENERGY TO LOOK FOR HER
ANY MORE.
I DON'T KNOW WHERE TO GO...
>> Reporter: AN ANGUISHED CROWD-
BEARING IMAGES OF LOVED ONES-
QUICKLY GATHERED AROUND US.
GRANDMOTHERS, LIKE BILQUIS,
WHOSE DAUGHTER SHAHINOOR IS
AMONG THOSE MISSING.
MANY HERE GAVE D.N.A. SAMPLES IN
HOPES A MATCH COULD BE FOUND
WITH SOMEONE BURIED.
SO FAR, THEY SAID, NO WORD AND
NO COMPENSATION.
>> (translated): I HAD TWO
SONS AND A DAUGHTER IN LAW
WORKING ON THE SECOND FLOOR.
WE GOT THE BODIES OF MY OLDER
SON AND DAUGHTER-IN-LAW BUT THEY
HAVEN'T FOUND MY YOUNGER SON.
>> Reporter: ONE ORGANIZATION
THAT HAS SINCE PROMISED TO HELP
THEM IS BRAC, ORIGINALLY THE
BANGLADESH RURAL ADVANCEMENT
COMMITTEE.
IT IS THE WORLD'S LARGEST NON-
GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION.
BRAC IS PROVIDING ARTIFICIAL
LIMBS AND REHABILITATION TO
SCORES OF SURVIVORS.
>> (translated): I DON'T KNOW
ABOUT MY FUTURE, I HAVE NO
STRENGTH AND IT IS DIFFICULT FOR
ME TO MOVE.
>> Reporter: JOSNA AKTER WAS
RESCUED AFTER TWO DAYS UNDER THE
RUBBLE.
SHE MAY NOT FEEL LIKE IT BUT
DOCTORS SAY SHE'S LUCKY.
HER BACK INJURY, THOUGH SEVERE,
SHOULD HEAL IN A FEW MONTHS.
BRAC ARRANGED FOR HER FAMILY TO
RECEIVE SOME $600, EQUIVALENT TO
SEVERAL MONTHS PAY, AND WILL
KEEP TABS ON JOSNA AND ALL
VICTIMS AND FAMILIES.
>> WE HAVE COLLECTED ALL THE
STATISTICS OF WHAT HAPPENED TO
WHOM-- WHAT KIND OF COMPENSATION
THEY COLLECT AND WHETHER OR NOT
BRAC CAN HELP.
>> Reporter: BRAC HAS BEEN A
FAMILIAR PRESENCE IN DISASTER
RELIEF SINCE FAZLE ABED FOUNDED
IT IN THE EARLY 1970s, IN THE
WAKE OF TWO EPIC ONES: A CYCLONE
THAT KILLED 300,000 AND
BANGLADESH'S BLOODY WAR OF
INDEPENDENCE, WHOSE DEATH TOLL
WAS MANY TIMES THAT NUMBER.
ABED AT THE TIME, HE WAS AN UP
AND COMING LONDON-BASED
EXECUTIVE FOR SHELL OIL.
>> I SAW DEAD BODIES ALL OVER
THE PLACE, AND THAT SORT OF GAVE
ME THE FEELING THAT THE WORK I
DO HAS NO MEANING.
SO I SET UP BRAC, INITIALLY VERY
SMALL BECAUSE I DIDN'T HAVE MUCH
RESOURCES.
I SOLD MY HOUSE IN LONDON,
BROUGHT THE 15,000 POUNDS AND
STARTED WORK.
>> Reporter: HE STARTED SMALL
BUT NEVER LOST THE LARGE SCALE
THINKING OF HIS BIG OIL
BACKGROUND.
TODAY BRAC'S PROGRAMS HELP ABOUT
80% OF THIS COUNTRY'S 150
MILLION PEOPLE.
IT RUNS 38,000 SCHOOLS, A MAJOR
UNIVERSITY AND IS EVERYTHING
FROM A LARGE BANK TO THE
COUNTRY'S LARGEST PRODUCER OF
SEEDS.
>> SO EVERY BUSINESS THAT WE
HAVE GONE INTO HAS SOMETHING TO
DO WITH POOR PEOPLE'S NEEDS.
>> Reporter: THE ONE BUSINESS
BRAC IS NOT IN IS GARMENT
MAKING.
BUT ABED SAYS IT TOO IS A VITAL
AVENUE OUT OF POVERTY ESPECIALLY
FOR RURAL WOMEN.
>> IT'S CREATED ABOUT FOUR
MILLION JOBS, FOR THAN THREE
MILLION FOR WOMEN.
SO IT IS VERY CRITICAL...
>> Reporter: HE SAYS NOW BRAC
WILL BE MONITORING IMPROVEMENTS
THAT HAVE BEEN PROMISED SINCE
THE RANA PLAZA DISASTER.
>> WE ARE LOOKING AT
OPPORTUNITIES AS TO WHAT WILL BE
THE MORE EFFECTIVE ROLE THAT WE
COULD PLAY.
THERE IS CERTAINLY MORE
AWARENESS EVERYWHERE THAT WE
NEED TO DO SOMETHING VERY
QUICKLY, OTHERWISE BANGLADESH
MIGHT LOSE A LOT OF BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: IN JUNE, THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT, CITING SAFETY AND
WORKERS RIGHTS CONCERNS,
SUSPENDED TRADE PREFERENCES FOR
SOME BANGLADESHI EXPORTS, WHICH
WILL RAISE THEIR PRICE.
THE MOVE DOES NOT DIRECTLY
IMPACT GARMENTS BUT THERE'S FEAR
IT COULD DRIVE AWAY INVESTORS.
FOR ITS PART, THE GOVERNMENT
SAYS IT WILL MAKE LAND AVAILABLE
FOR NEW SAFER FACTORIES AND SAYS
IT WILL TRAIN 400 NEW
INSPECTORS.
IT HAS JUST 18 OVER-SEEING 5,000
FACTORIES, MANY IN RAPIDLY BUILT
STRUCTURES LIKE RANA PLAZA.
COMMERCE MINISTER GHULAM QUADER
SAYS THE INDUSTRY GREW MUCH
FASTER THAN THE CAPACITY TO
REGULATE IT.
AND HE ADMITS, THE GOVERNMENT
WANTED TO PROTECT AN IMPORTANT
SOURCE OF EXPORT EARNINGS.
>> Reporter: HE SAYS UNIONS,
KEPT DOWN IN THE PAST, WILL NOW
BE ALLOWED A GREER VATOICE, A
MOVE URGED BY BRAC FOUNDER ABED.
>> ONLY A COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO,
IF YOU ASKED A GARMENT INDUSTRY
OWNER WHAT DO YOU THINK OF A
UNION, THEY WILL SAY NO, NO, NO,
NO UNIONS.
BUT NOW, MANY OF THEM ARE SAYING
THAT YES.
>> Reporter: DAVID HASANAT RUNS
A RARE COMPANY THAT WOULD ALLOW
OUR CAMERAS IN.
HE'S LEERY OF UNIONS, AT LEAST
IN HIS PLANTS, SAYING HE OFFERS
HIGHER THAN AVERAGE WAGES, ON
SITE DAY CARE, PENSIONS AND GOOD
FIRE CONTROL SYSTEMS.
IN ANY EVENT, HE SAYS, WESTERN
BUYERS REALLY HOLD THE CARDS AND
THEY CONTINUE TO SQUEEZE
PRODUCERS.
AFTER PREVIOUS DISASTERS, LIKE A
STRING OF FATAL FACTORY FIRES,
HE SAYS THERE WAS TALK BUT NO
ACTION.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH OF THIS
NINE POUND PRICE TAG IS YOUR
SHARE?
>> ABOUT TWO, MAXIMUM...
>> Reporter: HE SAYS THERE'S
UNRELENTING PRESSURE FROM BUYERS
TO CUT COSTS.
SO PRODUCERS CUT CORNERS.
PERHAPS A THIRD OF DHAKAS
FACTORIES ARE SUBSTANDARD, HE
SAYS, AND WESTERN CLIENTS COULD
CHANGE THIS IF THEY INSISTED ON
BETTER CONDITIONS.
>> Reporter: MAJOR BRAND BUYERS
SAY THEY HAVE STEPPED UP THEIR
OWN PLANT INSPECTIONS, THOUGH
NONE WOULD ALLOW US TO GO ALONG
ON A VISIT.
>> YOU PEOPLE ALSO HAVE
RESPONSIBILITY.
IT'S A GLOBAL BUSINESS.
IT'S A GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN...
>> Reporter: FORMER GARNTME
WORKER AND UNION ORGANIZER NAZMA
AKTER SAYS WORKERS HAVE A
MESSAGE FOR EVERYONE ELSE UP THE
GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAIN.
>> YOU SHOULD BUY OUR CLOTHES
AND PAY FAIR BECAUSE EVERYBODY
IS CHEATING THE WORKERS.
>> Reporter: EVERYBODY'S
CHEATING THE WORKERS?
>> YEAH.
THE CONSUMERS ARE NOT PAYING
ENOUGH FOR THEIR CLOTHES?
THE BRANDS ARE NOT PAYING
ENOUGH.
>> Reporter: ARE NOT PAYING
ENOUGH TO THE MANUFACTURERS?
>> THE MUFAANCTURER IS NOT
PAYING PROPER.
EVEN OUR GOVERNMENT, THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT ALSO IS NOT PROPERLY
IMPLEMENT, SO THESE ARE THE
PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS BETTER
WAGES AND CONDITIONS WILL BE
THAT REMAINS THE BEST
OPPORTUNITY FOR MILLIONS OF POOR
WOMEN.
BRAC FOUNDER ABED AGREES, EVEN
AS HE WORKS TO EXPAND THEIR
OPTIONS WITH PROGRAMS LIKE
DRIVER TRAINING.
>> DRIVING IS CHALLENGING BUT IT
IS A GOOD JOB AND IF I THOUGHT
IF BOYS CAN DO IT, SO CAN I...
>> Reporter: NASREEN SULTANA AND
MAHFUZ BEGUM ARE TRAINING TO
BECOME CHAUFFEURS...
>> I MAY START LOWER BUT I KNOW
THAT WHEN I GET A LICENSE AND
HAVE SOME EXPERIENCE ILL BE ABLE
TO EARN MUCH MORE THAN GARMENT
WORKERS, IF I DIDN'T HAVE THIS
CHANCE, MAYBE I'D HAVE TO BE A
GARMENT WORKER.
>> Reporter: IN THIS CROWDED
CAPITAL, IT'S NOT FOR THE FAINT
OF HEART AND IN THIS TRADITIONAL
SOCIETY, NOT USUALLY FOR WOMEN.
BUT IT DOES PROMISE PERHAPS TWO
TO THREE TIMES THE $37 A MONTH
MINIMUM THAT'S EARNED BY GARMENT
WORKERS.
>> Ifill: FRED'S REPORTING IS A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE UNDER-TOLD
STORIES PROJECT AT ST. MARYS
UNIVERSITY IN MINNESOTA.
A VERSION OF HIS STORY WILL AIR
THIS WEEKEND ON THE PBS PROGRAM
"RELIGION AND ETHICS
NEWSWEEKLY."
YOU CAN FIND HIS BLOG POST WITH
MORE ABOUT THE WORLDWIDE
ACTIVITIES OF THE ORGANIZATION
BRAC ONLINE.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT:
MURDER, DRUG DEALS, GANGSTERS
AND A DECADES-LONG CRIME SPREE.
IT'S ALL ON DISPLAY AT THE TRIAL
OF A REPUTED BOSTON MOB BOSS.
JUDY WOODRUFF HAS OUR UPDATE IN
A CONVERSATION SHE RECORDED
YESTERDAY.
>> Woodruff: THE TRIAL IS ON
BREAK FOR THE HOLIDAY, BUT FOR
SEVERAL WEEKS, PROSECUTORS HAVE
BEEN MAKING THEIR CASE AGAINST
JAMES WHITEY BULGER.
TESTIMONY AT TIMES HAS PORTRAYED
HIM AS A COLD-BLOODED KILLER
TURNED F.B.I. INFORMANT AS WELL
AS A DRUG LORD FEARED ON THE
STREETS OF SOUTH BOSTON IN THE
1970'S AND 1980'S, CONVICTED
DRUG DEALERS, BOOKERS HAVE BEEN
CALLED TO THE STAND, SO HAVE
SONS, DAUGHTERS, SIBLINGS AND
GIRLFRIENDS OF THOSE ALLEGEDLY
MURDERED BY BULGER AND THE MOB.
KEVIN COLIN, A REPORTER AND
COLUMNIST FOR "THE BOSTON GLOBE"
HAS BEEN THERE FOR ALL OF IT.
HE'S THE CO-AUTHOR OF A BOOK
ABOUT THE STORY.
TELL US ABOUT THE MOST POWERFUL
TESTIMONY YOU HAVE BEEN
LISTENING TO.
>> JUDY, I THINK IT'S
INTERESTING BECAUSE OBVIOUSLY A
LOT OF THE PEOPLE THAT HAVE
TESTIFIED AGAINST WHITEY BULGER
ARE FROM THE WRONG SIDE OF THE
TRACKS.
THEY'RE CRIMINAL THEMSELVES.
THERE IS A CORRUPT FIBE AGENT
NAMED JOHN -- THERE IS A CORRUPT
F.B.I. AGENT NAMED JOHN MORRIS
WHO SPEND SPENT A GUY DAYS OWN
STAND.
THE HIT MAN WHO WAS ON THE STAND
FOR SEVERAL DAYS I DESCRIBED IN
ONE OF MY COLUMNS AFTER THE
FIRST FEW DAYS OF TESTIMONY WE
WERE HIT BY PUNISHING RAIN.
HE'S SUCH A VENEAL AND VILE MAN
CONVICTED OF MURDERING 20 PEOPLE
IT WAS ALMOST AS IF THERE WAS A
HIGHER POWER THAT NEEDED TO WASH
US OF HAVING TO LISTEN TO THIS
GUY, BUT I THINK THE MOST
POWERFUL TESTIMONY OVER THE LAST
TWO WEEKS HAS COME FROM ORDINARY
PEOPLE BECAUSE THERE WAS A MYTH
THAT THE GOVERNMENT,
PARTICULARLY THE F.B.I. AND THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT WERE WILLING
TO ACCEPT WHEN IT CAME TO WHITEY
BULGER IS THAT HE ONLY KILLED
OTHER CRIMINALS.
THAT DIED ON THE WATERFRONT OF
SOUTH BOSTON WITH MICHAEL
DONAHUE IN 1982 AND HIS FAMILY
HAS BEEN IN COURT EVERY DAY FOR
THE LAST FEW WEEKS, AND
YESTERDAY JOHN MORRIS, THAT
CORRUPT F.B.I. AGENT WHO HELPED
GET MICHAEL DONAHUE MURDERED
TURNED TO THE FAMILY AND
APOLOGIZED FOR THEM.
THAT MURDER HAPPENED 31 YEARS
AGO AND THIS IS THE FIRST TIME
ANYONE REMOTELY CONNECTED TO
THIS GOVERNMENT HAS APOLOGIZED
TO THE DONAHUE FAMILY.
PAT DONAHUE, MICHAEL'S WIDOW WHO
RAISED THREE BOYOS HER OWN AFTER
HER HUSBAND WAS MURDERED WITH
F.B.I. COMPLICITY, AS SHE SAID
TO ME, "IT'S A LITTLE LATE FOR
AN APOLOGY," BUT IF YOU LOOK AT
THE DONAHUE FAMILY THE WAY THEY
HQVE BEEN DRAGGED THROUGH THE
MUD BY THEIR OWN GOVERNMENT, THE
IDEA THAT THE F.B.I. GOT THEIR
HUSBAND AND THEIR FATHER KILLED
IS ONE THING BUT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT REFUSED TO APOLOGIZE
TO THEM, REFUSED TO SETTLE WITH
THEM, DRAGGED THEM THROUGH NINE
YEARS OF LITIGATION, AND SO TO
SEE THAT APOLOGY IN THE COURT
WAS ONE OF THE MOST EMOTIONAL
MOMENTS AND IT REALLY HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH TESTIMONY.
IT REALLY WASN'T EVIDENCE, IT
WAS JUST A SIGN OF EMOTION AND
HUMANITY IN A PLACE WHERE THAT
HAS BEEN SORELY LACKING.
>> Woodruff: THERE ARE SO MANY
PIECES TO THIS STORY, KEVIN
CULLEN.
HOW ALL TOGETHER HAS THE
PROSECUTION TRIED TO PORTRAY
BULGER?
>> I THINK, JUDY, IN YOUR
BUILD-UP YOU DESCRIBED IT
PERFECTLY.
YOU DESCRIBED HIM AS -- THEY
DESCRIBED HIM AS A COLD-BLOODED
MURDERER, AS AN F.B.I. INFORM
ANTD AND AS SOMEONE WHO ALLOWED
DRUGS TO GO THROUGH SOUTH BOSTON
WHERE THERE WERE SOME PEOPLE,
SYCOPHANTS OF HIM AND
PARTICULARLY OF HIS POLITICIAN
BROTHER BILL BULGER WHO SAID
THAT WHITEY KEPT DRUGS OUT OF
SOUTHEY.
I LIVED THERE IN THE 1980'S AND
1990'S AND I KNEW THAT WAS
BALONEY BECAUSE THERE WERE DRUGS
EVERYWHERE IN SOUTH BOSTON AND
THE LAST COUPLE OF DAYS DRUG
DEALERS HAVE BEGUN TO GET ON THE
STAND AND THEY'LL CONTINUE TO
GET ON THE STAND AND WHAT THEY
HAVE BEEN TESTIFYING TO TODAY IS
THAT WHITEY BULGER TOOK A CUT OF
EVERYTHING IN THAT TOWN.
HE TOOK MILLIONS OF DOLLARS FROM
THE DRUG TRADE TO PUT OUT THE
CHARADE THAT HE WASN'T INVOLVED
IN DRUGS, THAT HE ACTUALLY
CHASED DRUG DEALERS OUT OF SOUTH
BOSTON.
THAT WAS THE OTHER MYTH THAT HE
AND HIS APOLOGISTS PROPAGATED
BUT THERE WAS A DRUG DEALER
NAMED BILLY SHEA UP THERE TODAY
AND HE EXPLAINED HOW WHITEY SENT
HIM TO SET UP A COCAINE BUSINESS
BUT INSTRUCTED HIM "MAKE SURE NO
ONE KNOWS I'M INVOLVED" BUT HIS
WEEKLY CUT AS LITTLE AS $3,000 A
WEEK, SOMETIMES WHEN THEY GOT IN
THE CAN COCAINE IN A BIG WAY
WHITEY BULGER WAS GETTING
$10,000 A WEEK FOR OVERSEEING
THAT DRUG EMPIRE.
>> Woodruff: THE GATHER THAT
BULGER IS ACKNOWLEDGING THAT HE
DID A LOT OF THESE THINGS, HIS
ROLE IN MURDERS AND DRUG DEALS
BUT IT'S THE IDEA OF BEING AN
INFORMANT FOR THE F.B.I. THAT HE
REJECTS.
HOW DOES THAT FIT INTO WHAT HIS
DEFENSE IS SAYING?
>> SO FAR, JUDY, THAT IS THE
ESSENCE OF HIS DEFENSE, AND FROM
A LEGAL PERSPECTIVE IT'S QUITE
ODD BECAUSE WHITEY BULGER IS
FACING MORE THAN 30 COUNTS IN A
RACKETEERING INDICTMENT, 19 OF
WHICH REFER TO MURDERS BUT
WHITEY BULGER IS NOT CHARGED
WITH BEING AN INFORMANT.
THAT'S NOT A CRIME.
BUT HIS DEFENSE IS SPENDING
ALMOST 90% OF ITS ARGUMENT IN
ITS CROSS-EXAMINATION OF
WITNESSES HAMMERING AT THE
POINT.
THEY'RE ARGUING A TECHNICALITY.
THEY'RE SAYING THAT WHITEY
BULGER NEVER SIGNED HIS
INFORMANT REPORTS, HE NEVER GAVE
HIS FINGERPRINTS, HE NEVER
ALLOWED HIS PHOTOGRAPH TO BE
TAKEN AND PUT WITH HIS INFORMANT
REPORT BUT AS SOMEBODY WHO HAS
COVERED THIS WORLD FOR A LONG
TIME, JUDY, THAT'S SPECIOUS.
THAT IS A SPECIOUS ARGUMENT.
IT'S PRETTY OBVIOUS, LIKE I
SAID, THAT THE PUBLIC RECORD IS
GOING IN THERE, THERE ARE ALL
THESE REPORTS.
THE DEFENSE IS ARGUING THAT THE
REPORTS WERE TOTALLY MADE UP BY
ONE AGENT, JOHN CONNOLLY, HIS
HANDLER AND JOHN MORRIS, THE
CORRUPT SUPERVISOR WHO JUST
TESTIFIED.
>> Woodruff: IN A FEW SECONDS
LEFT, KEVIN CONSISTENTLY, SOUNDS
LIKE THEY'RE NOT PUTTING UP MUCH
DEFENSE, IS WHAT YOU ARE SAYING.
>> I REMEMBER TALKING TO GWEN
ABOUT THIS A COUPLE WEEKS AGO,
JUDY, AND I SAID THAT THE
DEFENSE WENT IN THERE AND COPPED
TO ABOUT 80% OF THE INDICTMENT.
>> Woodruff: RIGHT.
>> THEY ADMITTED HE'S A
RACKETEER AND EXTORTIONIST, SO
THEY'RE SPECIFIC ARGUING THAT
HE'S NOT AN INFORMANT AND THEY
HOPE THAT WHILE HE ADMITS TO
THESE OTHER THINGS THAT HEEL BE
ABLE TO CONVINCE THE JURY
HEDIDN'T KILL THOSE WOMEN, THE
TWO WOMEN HE'S CHARGED WITH,
THAT'S WHAT HE CAN'T LIVE WITH,
THE STRATEGY IS I'VE ADMITTED TO
THESE OTHER THINGS, WHY DON'T
YOU BELIEVE ME WHEN I SAY I
DIDN'T KILL THESE WOMEN?
>> Woodruff: KEVIN CULLEN WITH
"THE STONBO GLOBE."
THE TRIAL RESUMES ON MONDAY.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE EGYPTIAN ARMY SUSPENDED THE
CONSTITUTION AND REMOVED
PRESIDENT MOHAMED MORSI.
AN INTERIM GOVERNMENT WAS
INSTALLED UNTIL NEW ELECTIONS
CAN BE HELD.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
EGYPTIANS CELEBRATED IN THE
STREETS.
AND, BOLIVIA ACCUSED EUROPEAN
COUNTRIES OF AGGRESSION AFTER
ITS PRESIDENTIAL PLANE WAS
FORCED TO LAND ON RUMORS THE
NATIONAL SECURITY LEAKER EDWARD
SNOWDEN MIGHT BE ON BOARD.
>> Brown: OUR SCIENCE WEDNESDAY
FEATURE ONLINE LOOKS AT SOME
BUDDING BREAKTHROUGHS IN STEM
CELL RESEARCH.
HARI SREENIVASAN TELLS US MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: READ OUR STORY
ABOUT PROMISING ADVANCES
IN GROWING NEW LIVER CELLS IN
MICE AND WHAT THAT MIGHT MEAN
FOR HUMANS.
PLUS, TELL US HOW YOU USE OUR
SCIENCE COVERAGE.
TAKE OUR SURVEY ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
AND DO YOU NEED A GOOD BOOK FOR
THE HOLIDAYS?
IN HONOR OF INDEPENDENCE DAY,
OUR STAFF IS RECOMMENDING THEIR
FAVORITE BOOKS ABOUT THE
AMERICAN EXPERIENCE.
FIND THOSE AND SHARE YOUR PICKS
ON THE RUNDOWN.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
GWEN?
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
TOMORROW, ON INDEPENDENCE DAY,
WE'LL ASK HISTORIANS WHAT THE
SUPREME COURT RULINGS ON VOTING
RIGHTS AND GAY MARRIAGE TELL US
ABOUT OUR SOCIETY AND CULTURE.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.